The texts that I used to research connections of racism were The Merchant of
Venice by William Shakespeare, To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee, Schwarzfarher
by Pepe Duquart and an extract from Clenched Fist by Witi lhimaera. To focus my
connections I used three questions: Who is being mistreated? What are the
consequences of this behaviour? And what does the portrayal of racism reveal about
society? I expect to find racism more prevalent in the older texts such as The
Merchant of Venice and To Kill a Mockingbird whereas in the more modern texts
such as Schwarzfarher and Clenched Fist it will be less prevalent because of the
holocaust and the Blacks’ civil rights movement in America.
Treatment of difference by the majority.
In the texts that I have studied a significant connecting aspect that I found was
racism. Racism occurred in these texts in the treatment of outsiders to society.
In Schwarzfahrer, the old lady mistreats the black man. During her monologue she
calls him a “lout”, “savage” and distances herself from him by referring to herself as
“we” and him as “they”. She never directly addresses him. Likewise in To Kill a
Mockingbird, Tom Robinson, a Blackman convicted of raping a white woman
(Mayella Ewell) is mistreated by Bob Ewell who knowingly falsely accuses him of
raping his daughter because he helped her. He is then mistreated by the gang of
men, who go to his jail cell and threaten to kill him. They presume that he is guilty
because he is black. They believe that he must be guilty because black
people supposedly act like animals. This suggests that the majority being white
society judge Tom differently from themselves (in this case Tom is black) as outsiders
physically. They do not judge him for who he is. Tom Robinson is actually a very nice
person who helped Mayella do something but he was judged on his skin colour and
this made him an outsider from the white majority. In society people are often too
quick to judge people for what they are not who they are (1)
Another idea that occurred in my texts was that people abuse people who they feel
threaten them. Evidence ofthis is that Bob Ewell feels that his manhood or power
around his home is threatened by Tom Robinson as Tom helps Mayella with things
around the house, e.g. cutting wood. The way that the old lady is sitting, holding her
handbag in Schwarzfahrer suggests to us that she feels threatened by him. The
texts suggest that they characters these illustrate that they are thought of as a threat
that needs to be abused in order so it does not rise up against the people. Bob Ewell
though that Tom was a threat to his status of the head of the family and man about
the house so he mistreated Tom by falsely accusing him of raping Mayella.
Revenge is a consequence of racial behaviour.
In the texts that I have studied a consequence of racism is that a character who has
been mistreated seeks revenge. In Schwarzfahrer, the black man seeks revenge
against the old lady who has been persecuting him. He eats her ticket and as a
consequence she is kicked off the bus. Likewise in the Merchant of Venice, Shylock
seeks revenge against Antonio for calling him a “misbeliever, cutthroat dog” and
“spit upon my Jewish gabardine”. Shylock’s revenge is seeking the pound of
Antonio’s flesh that he was promised in the bond. He will not accept any amount of
money; he wants his revenge against Antonio. I think that people will seek revenge
because they have been hurt and they feel they have been wrongly treated (2).
Another consequence of racist behaviour is people not standing up against racism. In
the Clenched fist, Api is “smouldering with fury” about having a photo taken of him with a tourist yet he does nothing about his mistreatment. However, in To Kill A
Mockingbird, Atticus Finch, a lawyer, stands up for Tom Robinson, a black man. He
goes up against the mainly racist town he showed character by doing this. Likewise,
Shylock also stood up for himself by defying the pleas of the Christians for not seeking
his pound of flesh (3).
Age affects the attitude of individuals.
Racism reveals how children’s attitudes differ from adult’s attitudes. In To Kill a
Mocking Bird Jem and Scout (Atticus’ children) both are very accepting of their cook
Calpurnia, they go to church with her and sit in the black seats at the court room.
Likewise in Schwarzfarher, the boy laughs at the old lady pulling her coat from
underneath the black man but does not see her nasty intent. Whereas in The
Merchant of Venice Antonio is racist to Shylock calling him “misbeliever cutthroat
dog” Likewise, the old lady is racist to the black man in Schwarzfarher. The evidence
suggests that children have no preconceived ideas about race. They are willing to
accept people for who they are whereas adults accept people for what they are.
Children see people rather than viewing a race (4).
The portrayal of racism reveals that people will abuse people even if they have not
been wronged by them. In The merchant of Venice, Shylock has not wronged
Antonio but Antonio has rated: Shylock on the Rialto in front of all the other
Merchants because he was Jewish. In Schwarzfarher, the old lady has no reason to
abuse the black man. In To kill a mocking bird, Tom Robinson did nothing to the
gang of men who wanted to kill him apart from his race. In all three cases the
abusers are driven to abuse the black people or Jews just because of their religion
or race. This illustrates how strong their hate and racism is for these people (5).
In conclusion, I found was that most commonly people who are different to the
majority are mistreated. This difference is usually either racial or religious to the
majority. Also a major consequence of racial behaviour is that people will seek
revenge against the abuser because they feel that they do not deserve this
treatment. Also that children’s and adult’s attitude to race are different and children
accept people for who they are not what they are. The overriding theme that I found
was that difference is often prejudiced against.
